.\" Copyright 2002 Red Hat, Inc.
.\"
.TH SID 1 "November 2002" SID "Red Hat"
.SH NAME
sid - SID simulator driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sid OPTIONS [EXECUTABLE]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Run an executable in a simulated hardware environment.  Command line
options allow details of the environment to be specified, such as CPU
type(s), memory layout and monitor support.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR "-h" ", " "--help"
Show usage
.TP
.BR "-v" ", " "--version"
Print simulator version
.TP
.BR "-n" ", " "--no-run"
Load/run simulation but do not run simulation
.TP
.BR "-f" " FILE"
Also read configuration FILE
.TP
.BR "-e" " LINE"
Also perform configuration LINE
.TP
.B "--persistent"
Run top-level loop indefinitely
.TP
.BR "--save-temps" "=FILE"
Write configuration to FILE; use ``-'' for standard output
.TP
.BR "--wrap" "=COMPONENT"
Turn on SID API tracing for COMPONENT
.TP
.B "--verbose"
Turn on run-time verbosity settings
.TP
.B "--tksm"
Add an experimental Tk system monitor
.TP
.B "--tksched"
Add a simple Tk sim-scheduler controller
.TP
.BR "--board" "=BOARD"
Instantiate built-in BOARD; remaining options apply to the most recently instantiated BOARD.  BOARD may be any of:
.RS 7
.TP
.B basic
basic CPU and memory board
.TP
.SH "BOARD-SPECIFIC OPTIONS"
.TP
.BR "--cpu" "=CPU"
Change board to use CPU
.TP
.BR "--load" "=EXECUTABLE"
Load EXECUTABLE into board's memory.  Comma-separated sub-options are:
.RS 7
.TP
\fBbus\fR=MAPPER
Load file into bus MAPPER
.TP
\fBcpu\fR=CPU
Set pc of cpu CPU on load
.TP
.B all-cpus
Shortcut for using all CPUs
.RE
.TP
.BR "--gloss"
Add gloss (operating system) support.
.TP
.BR "--gdb" "=PORT"
Add a GDB stub on TCP port PORT.
.TP
.BR "--engine" "=(scache|pbb)"
Set board's engine type to scache or pbb.
.TP
.BR "--sidrtc" "=ADDR"
Add a real-time clock at address ADDR.
.TP
.BR "--sidcodec" "=ADDR"
Add an audio codec at address ADDR.
.TP
.BR "--insn-count" "=COUNT"
Set block of uninterrupted ticks for instructions.
.TP
.B "--enable-warnings"
Enable CPU execution warnings.
.TP
.BR "--trace-extract"
Enable CPU instruction decoder tracing.
.TP
.B "--trace-semantics"
Enable CPU execution tracing.
.TP
.B "--trace-disassemble"
Enable CPU execute disassembly.
.TP
.B "--trace-counter"
Enable CPU instruction counting.
.TP
.B "--trace-core"
Enable bus access tracing.
.TP
.BR "--icache" "=TYPE"
Add an instruction cache hw-cache-TYPE to board.
.TP
.BR "--dcache" "=TYPE"
Add a data cache hw-cache-TYPE to board.
.br
eg., direct/64kb/32, 4way/256kb/64/lru
.TP
.BR "--EB" ", " "--EL"
Set power-up CPU mode to big/little endian.
.TP
.BR "--gprof" "=FILE" "[,cycles[=N]]"
Turn on GPROF profiling; collect after N ticks (default N=1) or every insn-count ticks, if cycles not specified.
.TP
.BR "--memory-region" "=BASE,SIZE"
Add RAM from region from BASE to BASE+SIZE-1.  Comma-separated sub-options are:
.RS 7
.TP
\fBbus\fR=MAPPER
Attach memory to bus MAPPER.
.TP
.B "read-only"
Make memory read-only.
.TP
\fBalias\fR=BASE2
Add an alias at BASE2.
.TP
\fBfile\fR=NAME
Load/save memory from file.
.TP
.B mmap
Memory map given file.
.TP
\fBlatency\fR=r:w
Set read, write latencies [0:0]
.TP
\fBlatency\fR=value
Set both read and write latencies [0]
.RE

Most board-specific options can be used in board-neutral position \
where they are interpreted as session-specific or default settings. \
All
.B "-b"
options are performed first, in sequence.  All
.B "-f"
and
.B "-e"
options are performed after
.B "-b"
options, in sequence.
.B "FILE"
names supplied without
.B "-f"
are processed last, in sequence.
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
Normally, exit status is 0 if the simulation terminates successfully.
Command line or configuration errors result in a non-zero exit status
with an error message displayed on standard error.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gdb(1).
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <sid@sources.redhat.com>.
.SH COPYING
Copyright \(co 2002 Red Hat, Inc.
.br
This is free software; see the file COPYING.SID in the source for copying conditions.
.SH AUTHORS
Red Hat, Inc.
