\input texinfo       @c                    -*- Texinfo -*-

@c This file is work in progress.
@c Don't expect it to go through texinfo just yet. --bje

@include version.texi

@ifinfo
Copyright @copyright{} 2000 Red Hat, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries a copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end ifinfo

@synindex ky cp
@c
@c This file documents the internals of the Cpu tools GENerator, CGEN.
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2000 Red Hat, Inc.
@c

@setchapternewpage odd
@settitle CGEN
@titlepage
@finalout
@title The Cpu tools GENerator, CGEN.
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@sp 1
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author Ben Elliston
@author Red Hat, Inc.
@page

@tex
{\parskip=0pt \hfill Red Hat, Inc.\par \hfill
\TeX{}info \texinfoversion\par }
@end tex

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2000 Red Hat, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end titlepage

@node Top
@top Introduction

@cindex version
This manual documents the internals of CGEN, version @value{VERSION}.

@menu
* Introduction::                Introduction
* Guile::
* Conventions::                 Coding conventions
* Applications::
* Source file overview::
* Option processing::
* Parsing::
* Version numbering::
* Glossary::                    Glossary
* Index::                       Index
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

This document details the implementation and internals of CGEN, the
``Cpu tools GENerator''.  It focuses on theory of operation and concepts
rather than extensive details of the implementation--these details
date too quickly.

@node Conventions
@chapter Conventions

There are a number of conventions used in the cgen source code.  If you
take the time to absorb these now, the code will be much easier to
understand.

@itemize @bullet
@item Procedures and variables local to a file are named @code{-foo}.
@item Only routines that emit application code begin with @code{gen-}.
@item Symbols beginning with @code{c-} are either variables containing C code
      or procedures that generate C code, similarily for C++ and @code{c++-}.
@item Variables containing C code begin with @code{c-}.
@item Only routines that emit an entire file begin with @code{cgen-}.
@item All @file{.cpu} file elements shall have @code{-foo-parse} and
      @code{-foo-read} procedures.
@item Global variables containing class definitions shall be named
      @code{<class-name>}.
@item Procedures related to a particular class shall be named
      @code{class-name-proc-name}, where @code{class-name} may be abbreviated.
@item Procedures that test whether something is an object of a
      particular class shall be named @code{class-name?}.
@item In keeping with Scheme conventions, predicates shall have a
      @code{?} suffix.
@item In keeping with Scheme conventions, methods and procedures that
      modify an argument or have other side effects shall have a
      @code{!} suffix, usually these procs return @code{*UNSPECIFIED*}.
@item All @code{-foo-parse}, @code{parse-foo} procs shall have @code{context}
      as the first argument. [FIXME: not all such procs have been
      converted]
@end itemize

@node Applications
@chapter Applications

One of the most importance concepts to grasp with CGEN is that it is not
a simulator generator.  It's a generic tool generator--it can be used to
generate a simulator, an assembler, a disassembler and so on.  These
``applications'' can then produce different outputs from the same CPU
description.

When you want to run the cgen framework, an application-specific source
file is loaded into the Guile interpreter to get cgen running.  This
source file loads in any other source files it needs and then, for
example, calls:

@example
    (cgen #:argv argv
	  #:app-name "sim"
	  #:arg-spec sim-arguments
	  #:init sim-init!
	  #:finish sim-finish!
	  #:analyze sim-analyze!)
    )
@end example

This gets the whole framework started, in an application-specific way.

node Source file overview
@chapter Source file overview

@table @file

@item *.cpu, *.opc, *.sim
Files belonging to each CPU description.  .sim files are automatically
included if they are defined for the given architecture.

@item doc/*.texi
Texinfo documentation for cgen.

@item slib/*.scm
Third-party libraries written in Scheme.  For example, sort.scm is a
collection of procedures to sort lists.

@item Makefile.am
automake Makefile for cgen.

@item NEWS
News about cgen.

@item README
Notes to read abot cgen.

@item attr.scm
Handling of cgen attributes.

@item cgen-gas.scm
Top-level for GAS testsuite generation.

@item cgen-opc.scm
Top-level for opcodes generation.

@item cgen-sid.scm
Top-level for SID simulator generation.
 
@item cgen-sim.scm
Top-level for older simulator generation.

@item cgen-stest.scm
Top-level for simulator testsuite generation.

@item configure.in
Template for `configure'--process with autoconf.

@item cos.scm
cgen object system.  Adds object oriented features to the Scheme
language.  See the top of @file{cos.scm} for the user-visible
procedures.

@item decode.scm
Generic decoder routines.

@item desc-cpu.scm
???

@item desc.scm
???

@item dev.scm
Debugging support.

@item enum.scm
Enumerations.

@item fixup.scm
Some procedure definitions to patch up possible differences between
older and newer versions of Guile:

  * define a (load..) procedure that uses
    primitive-load-path if load-from-path is not known.

  * define =? and >=? if they aren't already known.

  * define %stat, reverse! and debug-enable in terms of
    older equivalent procedures, if they aren't already
    known.

@item gas-test.scm
GAS testsuite generator.

@item hardware.scm
Hardware description routines.

@item ifield.scm
Instruction fields.

@item insn.scm
Instruction defintions.

@item mach.scm
Architecture description routines.

@item minsn.scm
Macro instructions.

@item mode.scm
Modes.

@item model.scm
Model specification.

@item opc-asmdis.scm
For the opcodes applications.

@item opc-ibld.scm
Ditto.

@item opc-itab.scm
Ditto.

@item opc-opinst.scm
Ditto.

@item opcodes.scm
Ditto.

@item operand.scm
Operands.

@item pgmr-tools.scm
Programmer tools--debugging tools, mainly.

@item pmacros.scm
Preprocessor macros.

@item profile.scm
Unused?

@item read.scm
Read and parse .cpu files.  @code{maybe_load} is used to load in files
for required symbols if they are not already present in the environment
(say, because it was compiled).

@item rtl-c.scm
RTL to C translation.

@item rtl.scm
RTL support.

@item rtx-funcs.scm
RTXs.

@item sem-frags.scm
Semantic fragments.

@item semantics.scm
Semantic analysis for the CPU descriptions.

@item sid-cpu.scm
For the SID application.

@item sid-decode.scm
Ditto.

@item sid-model.scm
Ditto.

@item sid.scm
Ditto.

@item sim-arch.scm
For the simulator application.

@item sim-cpu.scm
Ditto.

@item sim-decode.scm
Ditto.

@item sim-model.scm
Ditto.

@item sim-test.scm
For the simulator testsuite application.

@item sim.scm
For the simulator application.

@item simplify.inc
Preprocessor macros to simplify CPU description files.  This file is not
loaded by the Scheme interpreter, but is instead included by the .cpu
file.

@item types.scm
Low-level types.

@item utils-cgen.scm
cgen-specific utilities.

@item utils-gen.scm
Code generation specific utilities.

@item utils-sim.scm
Simulator specific utilities.

@item utils.scm
Miscellaneous utilities.

@end table

@code{cgen} is the main entry point called by application file
generators. It just calls @code{-cgen}, but it does so wrapped inside a
@code{catch-with-backtrace} procedure to make debugging easier.

@node Version numbering
@chapter Version numbering

There are two version numbers: the version number of cgen itself and a
version number for the description language it accepts.  These are kept
in the symbols @code{-CGEN-VERSION} and @code{-CGEN-LANG-VERSION} in
@file{read.scm}.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
